                                         Scalable Training of Artificial Neural Networks with
                                         Adaptive Sparse Connectivity inspired by Network
                                         Science∗
                                         Decebal Constantin Mocanu1,3,* , Elena Mocanu2,3 , Peter Stone4 , Phuong H. Nguyen3 ,
                                         Madeleine Gibescu3 , and Antonio Liotta5
                                         1 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, De Rondom 70, 5612 AP,

                                         Eindhoven, The Netherlands
                                         2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, De Rondom 70, 5612 AP, Eindhoven,




arXiv:1707.04780v2 [cs.NE] 20 Jun 2018
                                         The Netherlands
                                         3 Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, De Rondom 70, 5612 AP, Eindhoven,

                                         The Netherlands
                                         4 Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, 2317 Speedway, Stop D9500 Austin, Texas

                                         78712-1757, USA
                                         5 Data Science Centre, University of Derby, Lonsdale House, Quaker Way, Derby DE1 3HD, United Kingdom
                                         * Corresponding author: d.c.mocanu@tue.nl



                                         ABSTRACT


                                         Through the success of deep learning in various domains, artificial neural networks are currently among the most used
                                         artificial intelligence methods. Taking inspiration from the network properties of biological neural networks (e.g. sparsity,
                                         scale-freeness), we argue that (contrary to general practice) artificial neural networks, too, should not have fully-connected
                                         layers. Here we propose sparse evolutionary training of artificial neural networks, an algorithm which evolves an initial sparse
                                         topology (Erdős-Rényi random graph) of two consecutive layers of neurons into a scale-free topology, during learning. Our
                                         method replaces artificial neural networks fully-connected layers with sparse ones before training, reducing quadratically the
                                         number of parameters, with no decrease in accuracy. We demonstrate our claims on restricted Boltzmann machines, multi-layer
                                         perceptrons, and convolutional neural networks for unsupervised and supervised learning on 15 datasets. Our approach has
                                         the potential to enable artificial neural networks to scale up beyond what is currently possible.



                                         Introduction
                                         Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are among the most successful artificial intelligence methods nowadays. ANNs have led to
                                         major breakthroughs in various domains, such as particle physics1 , deep reinforcement learning2 , speech recognition, computer
                                         vision, and so on3 . Typically, ANNs have layers of fully-connected neurons3 , which contain most of the network parameters
                                         (i.e. the weighted connections), leading to a quadratic number of connections with respect to their number of neurons. In turn,
                                         the network size is severely limited, due to computational limitations.
                                              By contrast to ANNs, biological neural networks have been demonstrated to have a sparse (rather than dense) topology4, 5 ,
                                         and also hold other important properties that are instrumental to learning efficiency. These have been extensively studied in6
                                         and include scale-freeness7 (detailed in Methods section) and small-worldness8 . Nevertheless, ANNs have not evolved to
                                         mimic these topological features9, 10 , which is why in practice they lead to extremely large models. Previous studies have
                                         demonstrated that, following the training phase, ANN models end up with weights histograms that peak around zero11–13 .
                                         Moreover, in our previous work14 , we observed a similar fact. Yet, in the machine learning state-of-the-art, sparse topological
                                         connectivity is pursued only as an aftermath of the training phase13 , which bears benefits only during the inference phase.
                                              In a recent paper, we introduced compleX Boltzmann Machines (XBMs), a sparse variant of Restricted Boltzmann Machines
                                         (RBMs), conceived with a sparse scale-free topology10 . XBMs outperform their fully-connected RBM counterparts and are
                                         much faster, both in the training and the inference phases. Yet, being based on a fixed sparsity pattern, XBMs may fail to
                                         properly model the data distribution. To overcome this limitation, in this paper we introduce a Sparse Evolutionary Training
                                           ∗ Preprint version, accepted for publication in Nature Communications, June 2018. Please read its published version here

                                         https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-04316-3.
(SET) procedure, which takes into consideration data distributions and creates sparse bipartite layers suitable to replace the
fully-connected bipartite layers in any type of ANNs.
    SET is broadly inspired by the natural simplicity of the evolutionary approaches, which were explored successfully in our
previous work on evolutionary function approximation15 . The same evolutionary approaches have been explored for network
connectivity in16 , and for the layers architecture of deep neural networks17 . Usually, in the biological brain, the evolution
processes are split in four levels: phylogenic at generations time scale, ontogenetic at a daily (or yearly) time scale, epigenetic
at a seconds to days scale, and inferential at a milliseconds to seconds scale18 . A classical example which addresses all these
levels is NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT)19 . In short, NEAT is an evolutionary algorithm which seeks to
optimize both the parameters (weights) and the topology of an ANN for a given task. It starts with small ANNs with few
nodes and links, and gradually considers adding new nodes and links to generate more complex structures to the extent that
they improve performance. While NEAT has shown some impressive empirical results20 , in practice, NEAT and, most of its
direct variants have difficulty scaling due to their very large search space. To the best of our knowledge, they are only capable
of solving problems which are much smaller than the ones currently solved by the state-of-the-art deep learning techniques,
e.g. object recognition from raw pixel data of large images. In21 , Miconi has tried to use NEAT like principles (e.g. addition,
deletion) in combination with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) to train recurrent neural networks for small problems, due
to a still large search space. Very recently in22 and in23 , it has been shown that evolution strategies and genetic algorithms,
respectively, can train successfully artificial neural networks with up to 4 million parameters as a viable alternative to DQN2 for
reinforcement learning tasks, but they need over 700 CPUs to do so. To avoid being trapped in the same type of scalability
issues, in SET, we focus on using the best from both worlds (i.e. traditional neuroevolution and deep learning). E.g., evolution
just at the epigenetic scale for connections to yield a sparse adaptive connectivity, structured multi-layer architecture with fixed
amounts of layers and neurons to obtain ANN models easily trained by standard training algorithms, e.g. stochastic gradient
descent, and so on.
    Here, we claim that topological sparsity must be pursued starting with the ANN design phase, which leads to a substantial
reduction in connections and, in turn, to memory and computational efficiency. We show how ANNs perform perfectly well
with sparsely-connected layers. We found that sparsely-connected layers, trained with SET, can replace any fully connected
layers in ANNs, at no decrease in accuracy, while having quadratically fewer parameters even in the ANN design phase
(before training). This leads to reduced memory requirements and may lead to quadratically faster computational times in both
phases (i.e. training and inference). We demonstrate our claims on three popular ANN types (restricted Boltzmann machines,
multi-layer perceptrons, and convolutional neural networks), on two types of tasks (supervised and unsupervised learning), and
on 15 benchmark datasets. We hope that our approach will enable ANNs having billions of neurons and evolved topologies to
be capable of handling complex real-world tasks that are intractable using state-of-the-art methods.

Results
Sparse Evolutionary Training method        With SET, the bipartite ANN layers start from a random sparse topology (i.e. Erdős-
Rényi random graph24 ), evolving through a random process during the training phase towards a scale-free topology. Remarkably,
this process does not have to incorporate any constraints to force the scale-free topology. But our evolutionary algorithm is
not arbitrary: it follows a phenomenon that takes place in real-world complex networks (such as biological neural networks,
and protein interaction networks). Starting from an Erdős-Rényi random graph topology and throughout millenia of natural
evolution, networks end up with a more structured connectivity, i.e. scale-free7 or small-world8 topologies.
    The SET algorithm is detailed in Methods and exemplified in Fig. 1. Formally, let us defined a Sparse Connected (SCk )
layer in an ANN. This layer has nk neurons, collected in a vector hk = [hk1 , hk2 , ..., hknk ]. Any neuron from hk is connected to an
arbitrary number of neurons belonging to the layer below, hk−1 . The connections between the two layers are collected in a
                                k−1  k
sparse weight matrix Wk ∈ Rn ×n . Initially, Wk is a Erdős-Rényi random graph, in which the probability of a connection
                              k−1
between the neuron hki and h j is given by:

                   ε(nk + nk−1 )
      p(Wikj ) =                                                                                                                  (1)
                      nk nk−1
whereby ε ∈ R+ is a parameter of SET controlling the sparsity level. If ε  nk and ε  nk+1 then there is a linear number of
connections (i.e. non-zero elements), nW = |Wk | = ε(nk + nk−1 ), with respect to the number of neurons in the sparse layers. In
the case of fully-connected layers the number of connections is quadratic, i.e. nk nk−1 .
    However, it may be that this random generated topology is not suited to the particularities of the data that the ANN model
tries to learn. To overcome this situation, during the training process, after each training epoch, a fraction ζ of the smallest
positive weights and of the largest negative weights of SCk is removed. These removed weights are the ones closest to zero,
thus we do not expect that their removal will notably change the model performance. This has been shown, for instance, in13, 25


                                                                                                                                2/18
using more complex approaches to remove unimportant weights. Next, to let the topology of SCk to evolve so as to fit the data,
an amount of new random connections, equal to the amount of weights removed previously, is added to SCk . In this way, the
number of connections in SCk remains constant during the training process. After the training ends, we keep the topology of
SCk as the one obtained after the last weight removal step, without adding new random connections. To illustrate better these
processes, we make the following analogy. If we assume a connection as the entity which evolves over time, the removal of the
least important connections corresponds, roughly, to the selection phase of natural evolution, while the random addition of new
connections corresponds, roughly, to the mutation phase of natural evolution.
    It is worth highlighting that in the initial phase of conceiving the SET procedure, the weight-removal and weight-addition
steps after each training epoch were introduced based on our own intuition. However, in the last phases of preparing this paper
we have found that there is a similarity between SET and a phenomenon which takes place in biological brains, named synaptic
shrinking during sleep. This phenomenon has been demonstrated in two recent papers26, 27 . In short, it was found that during
sleep the weakest synapses in the brain shrink, while the strongest synapses remain unaltered, supporting the hypothesis that
one of the core functions of sleeping is to renormalize the overall synaptic strength increased while awake27 . By keeping the
analogy, this is - in a way - what happens also with the ANNs during the SET procedure.
    We evaluate SET in three types of ANNs, restricted Boltzmann machines28 , Multi Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), and
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)3 (all three are detailed in the Methods section), to experiment with both unsupervised
and supervised learning. In total, we evaluate SET on 15 benchmark datasets, as detailed in Table 1, covering a wide range of
fields in which ANNs are employed, such as biology, physics, computer vision, data mining, and economics. We also assess
SET in combination with two different training methods, i.e. contrastive divergence29 and stochastic gradient descent3 .
Performance on restricted Boltzmann machines First, we have analyzed the performance of SET on a bipartite undirected
stochastic ANN model, i.e. RBM28 , which is popular for its unsupervised learning capability30 and high performance as a
feature extractor and density estimator31 . The new model derived from the SET procedure was dubbed SET-RBM. In all
experiments, we set ε = 11, and ζ = 0.3, performing a small random search just on the MNIST dataset, to be able to assess if
these two meta-parameters are dataset specific or if their values are general enough to perform well also on different datasets.
     There are few studies on RBM connectivity sparsity10 . Still, to get a good estimation of SET-RBM capabilities we compared
it against RBMFixProb 10 (a sparse RBM model with a fixed Erdős-Rényi topology), fully-connected RBMs, and with the
state-of-the-art results of XBMs from10 . We chose RBMFixProb as a sparse baseline model to be able to understand better the
effect of SET-RBM adaptive connectivity on its learning capabilities, as both models, i.e. SET-RBM and RBMFixProb , are
initialized with an Erdős-Rényi topology. We performed experiments on 11 benchmark datasets coming from various domains,
as depicted in Table 1, using the same splitting for training and testing data as in10 . All models were trained for 5000 epochs
using Contrastive Divergence29 (CD) with 1, 3, and 10 CD steps, a learning rate of 0.01, a momentum of 0.9, and a weight
decay of 0.0002, as discussed in32 . We evaluated the generative performance of the scrutinized models by computing the
log-probabilities on the test data using Annealed Importance Sampling (AIS)33 , setting all parameters as in10, 33 . We have used
MATLAB for this set of experiments. We implemented SET-RBM and RBMFixProb ourselves; while for RBM and AIS we have
adapted the code provided by33 .
     Fig. 2 depicts the model’s performance on the DNA dataset; while Fig. 8 presents results on all datasets, using varying
numbers of hidden neurons (i.e. 100, 250, and 500 hidden neurons for the UCI evaluation suite datasets; and 500, 2500, and
5000 hidden neurons for the CalTech 101 Silhouettes and MNIST datasets). Table 2 summarizes the results, presenting the best
performer for each type of model for each dataset. In 7 out of 11 datasets, SET-RBM outperforms the fully-connected RBM,
while reducing the parameters by a few orders of magnitude. For instance, on the MNIST dataset, SET-RBM reaches -86.41
nats (natural units of information), with a 5.29-fold improvement over the fully-connected RBM, and a parameters reduction
down to 2%. In 10 out of 11 datasets, SET-RBM outperforms XBM, which represents the state-of-the-art results on these
datasets for sparse variants of RBM10 . It is interesting to see in Table 2 that RBMFixProb reaches its best performance on each
dataset in the case when the maximum number of hidden neurons is considered. Even if SET-RBM has the same amount of
weights with RBMFixProb , it reaches its maximum performance on 3 out of the 11 datasets studied just when a medium number
of hidden neurons is considered (i.e. DNA, Mushrooms, and CalTech 101 Silhouettes 28x28).
     Fig. 2 and Fig. 8 present striking results on stability. Fully-connected RBMs show instability and over-fitting issues. For
instance, using one CD step on the DNA dataset the RBMs have a fast learning curve, reaching a maximum after several epochs.
After that, the performance start to decrease giving a sign that the models start to be over-fitted. Moreover, as expected, the
RBM models with more hidden neurons (Fig. 2, b, c, e, f, h, i) over-fit even faster than the one with less hidden neurons (Fig. 2,
a, d, g). A similar behavior can be seen in most of the cases considered, culminating with a very spiky learning behavior in
some of them (Fig. 8). Contrary to fully-connected RBMs, the SET procedure stabilizes SET-RBMs and avoids over-fitting.
This situation can be observed more often when a high number of hidden neurons is chosen. For instance, if we look at the
DNA dataset, independently on the values of nh and nCD (Fig. 2), we may observe that SET-RBMs are very stable after they
reach around -85 nats, having almost a flat learning behavior after that point. Contrary, on the same dataset, the fully-connected


                                                                                                                             3/18
RBMs have a very short initial good learning behavior (for few epochs) and, after that, they go up and down during the 5000
epochs analyzed, reaching the minimum performance of -160 nats (Fig. 2, i). Note that these good stability and over-fitting
avoidance capacities are induced not just by the SET procedure, but also by the sparsity itself, as RBMFixProb , too, has a stable
behavior in almost all the cases. This happens due to the very small number of optimized parameters of the sparse models
in comparison with the high number of parameters of the fully-connected models (as reflected by the stacked bar from the
right y-axis of each panel of Fig. 2 and Fig. 8) which does not allow the learning procedure to over-fit the sparse models on the
training data.
     Furthermore, we verified our initial hypothesis about sparse connectivity in SET-RBM. Fig. 3 and Fig. 9 show how the
hidden neurons’ connectivity naturally evolves towards a scale-free topology. To assess this fact, we have used the null
hypothesis from statistics34 , which assumes that there is no relation between two measured phenomena. To see if the null
hypothesis between the degree distribution of the hidden neurons and a power-law distribution can be rejected, we have
computed the p-value35, 36 between them using a one-tailed test. To reject the null hypothesis the p-value has to be lower than a
statistically significant threshold of 0.05. In all cases (all panels of Fig. 3), looking at the p-values (y-axes to the right of the
panels), we can see that at the beginning of the learning phase the null hypothesis is not rejected. This was to be expected, as
the initial degree distribution of the hidden neurons is binomial due to the randomness of the Erdős-Rényi random graphs37
used to initialize the SET-RBMs topology. Subsequently, during the learning phase, we can see that, in many cases, the p-values
decrease considerably under the 0.05 threshold. When these situations occur, it means that the degree distribution of the hidden
neurons in SET-RBM starts to approximate a power-law distribution. As to be expected, the cases with fewer neurons (Fig. 3,
a, b, d, e, g) fail to evolve to scale-free topologies, while the cases with more neurons always evolve towards a scale-free
topology (Fig. 3, c, f, h, i). To summarize, in 70 out of 99 cases studied (all panels of Fig. 9), the SET-RBMs hidden neurons’
connectivity evolves clearly during the learning phase from an Erdős-Rényi topology towards a scale-free one.
     Moreover, in the case of the visible neurons, we have observed that their connectivity tends to evolve into a pattern that
is dependent on the domain data. To illustrate this behavior, Fig. 4 shows what happens with the amount of connections for
each visible neuron during the SET-RBM training process on the MNIST and CalTech 101 datasets. It can be observed that
initially the connectivity patterns are completely random, as given by the binomial distribution of the Erdős-Rényi topology.
After the models are trained for several epochs, some visible neurons start to have more connections and others fewer and
fewer. Eventually, at the end of the training process, some clusters of the visible neurons with clearly different connectivities
emerge. Looking at the MNIST dataset, we can observe clearly that in both cases analyzed (i.e. 500 and 2500 hidden neurons)
a cluster with many connections appeared in the center. At the same time, on the edges, another cluster appeared in which each
visible neuron has zero or very few connections. The cluster with many connections corresponds exactly to the region where
the digits appear in the images. On the Caltech 101 dataset, a similar behavior can be observed, except the fact that due to
the high variability of shapes on this dataset the less connected cluster still has a considerable amount of connections. This
behavior of the visible neurons’ connectivity may be used, for instance, to perform dimensionality reduction by detecting the
most important features on high dimensional datasets, or to make faster the SET-RBM training process.
Performance on multi layer perceptrons       To better explore the capabilities of SET, we have also assessed its performance
on classification tasks based on supervised learning. We developed a variant of MLP3 , dubbed SET-MLP, in which the
fully-connected layers have been replaced with sparse layers obtained through the SET procedure, with ε = 20, and ζ = 0.3.
We kept the ζ parameter as in the previous case of SET-RBM, while for the ε parameter we performed a small random search
just on the MNIST dataset. We compared SET-MLP to a standard fully-connected MLP, and to a sparse variant of MLP having
a fixed Erdős-Rényi topology, dubbed MLPFixProb . For the assessment, we have used three benchmark datasets (Table 1), two
coming from the computer vision domain (MNIST and CIFAR10), and one from particle physics (the HIGGS dataset1 ). In all
cases, we have used the same data processing techniques, network architecture, training method (i.e. SGD3 with fixed learning
rate of 0.01, momentum of 0.9, and weight decay of 0.0002), and a dropout rate of 0.3 (Table 3). The only difference between
MLP, MLPFixProb , and SET-MLP, consisted in their topological connectivity. We have used Python and the Keras library
(https://github.com/fchollet/keras) with Theano back-end38 for this set of experiments. For MLP we have used the standard
Keras implementation, while we implemented ourselves SET-MLP and MLPFixProb on top of the standard Keras libraries.
     The results depicted in Fig. 5 show how SET-MLP outperforms MLPFixProb . Moreover, SET-MLP always outperforms
MLP, while having two orders of magnitude fewer parameters. Looking at the CIFAR10 dataset, we can see that with only
just 1% of the weights of MLP, SET-MLP leads to significant gains. At the same time, SET-MLP has comparable results with
state-of-the-art MLP models after these have been carefully fine-tuned. To quantify, the second best MLP model in the literature
on CIFAR10 reaches about 74.1% classification accuracy39 and has 31 million parameters: while SET-MLP reaches a better
accuracy (74.84%) having just about 0.3 million parameters. Moreover, the best MLP model in the literature on CIFAR10 has
78.62% accuracy40 , with about 12 million parameters, while also benefiting from a pre-training phase41, 42 . Although we have
not pre-trained the MLP models studied here, we should mention that SET-RBM can be easily used to pre-train a SET-MLP
model to further improve performance.


                                                                                                                               4/18
    With respect to the stability and over-fitting issues, Fig. 5 shows that SET-MLP is also very stable, similarly to SET-RBM.
Note that due to the use of the dropout technique, the fully-connected MLP is also quite stable. Regarding the topological
features, we can see from Fig. 5 that, similarly to what was found in the SET-RBM experiments (Fig. 3), the hidden neuron
connections in SET-MLP rapidly evolve towards a power-law distribution.
    To understand better the effect of various regularization techniques, and activation functions, we performed a small
controlled experiment on the Fashion-MNIST dataset. We chose this dataset because it has a similar size with the MNIST
dataset, being at the same time a harder classification problem. We used MLP, MLPFixProb , and SET-MLP with three hidden
layers of 1000 hidden neurons each. Then, we varied for each model the following: (1) the weights regularization method (i.e.
L1 regularization with a rate of 0.0000001, L2 regularization with a rate of 0.0002, and no regularization), (2) the use (or not
use) of Nesterov momentum, and (3) two activation functions (i.e. SReLU43 and ReLU44 ). The regularization rates were found
by performing a small random search procedure with L1 and L2 levels between 0.01 and 0.0000001 to try maximizing the
performance of all three models. In all cases, we used SGD with 0.01 learning rate to train the models. The results depicted in
Fig. 6 show that, in this specific scenario, SET-MLP achieves the best performance if no regularization or L2 regularization is
used for the weights, while L1 regularization does not offer the same level of performance. To summarize, SET-MLP achieves
the best results on the Fashion-MNIST dataset with the following settings: SReLU activation function, without Nesterov
momentum, and without (or with L2) weights regularization. These being, in fact, the settings that we used in the MLP
experiments discussed above. It is worth highlighting that independently on the specific setting, the general conclusion drawn
up to now still holds. SET-MLP achieves a similar (or better) performance to that of MLP, while having a much smaller number
of connections. Also, SET-MLP always clearly outperforms MLPFixProb .

Performance on convolutional neural networks             As one of the most used ANN models nowadays are CNNs3 , we have
briefly studied how SET can be used in the CNN architectures to replace their fully connected layers with sparse evolutionary
counterparts. We considered a standard small CNN architecture, i.e. conv(32,(3,3))-dropout(0.3)-conv(32,(3,3))-pooling-
conv(64,(3,3))-dropout(0.3)-conv(64,(3,3))-pooling-conv(128,(3,3))-dropout(0.3)-conv(128,(3,3))-pooling), where the numbers
in brackets for the convolutional layers mean (number of filters, (kernel size)), and for the dropout layers represent the dropout
rate. Then, on top of the convolutional layers, we have used: (1) two fully connected layers to create a standard CNN, (2)
two sparse layers with a fixed Erdős-Rényi topology to create a CNNFixProb , and (3) two evolutionary sparse layers to create a
SET-CNN. For each model, each of the two layers on top was followed by a dropout(0.3) layer. On top of these, the CNN,
CNNFixProb , and SET-CNN contained also a softmax layer. Even if SReLU seems to offer a slightly better performance,
we used ReLU as activation function for the hidden neurons due to its wide utilization. We used SGD to train the models.
The experiments were performed on the CIFAR10 dataset. The results are depicted in Fig. 7. They show, same as in the
previous experiments with restricted Boltzmann machine and multi layer perceptron, that SET-CNN can achieve a better
accuracy than CNN, even if it has just about 4% of the CNN connections. To quantify this, we mention that in our experiments
SET-CNN reaches a maximum of 90.02% accuracy, CNNFixProb achieves a maximum of 88.26% accuracy, while CNN achieves
a maximum of 87.48% accuracy. Similar with the RBM experiments, we can observe that CNN is subject to a small over-fitting
behavior, while CNNFixProb and SET-CNN are very stable. Even if our goal was just to show that SET can be combined also
with the widely used CNNs and not to optimize the CNN variants architectures to increase the performance, we highlight
that, in fact, SET-CNN achieves a performance comparable with state-of-the-art results. The benefit of using SET in CNNs is
two-fold: to reduce the total number of parameters in CNNs, and to permit the use of larger CNN models.
    Last but not least, during all the experiments performed we observed that SET is quite stable with respect to the choice of
meta-parameters ε and ζ . There is no way to say that our choices offered the best possible performance, even if we fine-tuned
them just on one dataset, i.e. MNIST, and we evaluated their performance on all 15 datasets. Still, we can say that a ζ = 0.3 for
both, SET-RBM and SET-MLP, and an ε specific for each model type, SET-RBM (ε = 11), SET-MLP (ε = 20), and SET-CNN
(ε = 20) were good enough to outperform state-of-the-art.
    Considering the different datasets under scrutiny, we stress that we have assessed both image-intensive and non-image sets.
On image datasets, CNNs3 typically outperform MLPs. However, CNNs are not viable on other types of high-dimensional data,
such as biological data (e.g.45 ), or theoretical physics data (e.g.1 ). In those cases, MLPs will be a better choice. This is in fact
the case of the HIGGS dataset (Fig. 5, e, f), where SET-MLP achieves 78.47% classification accuracy and has about 90000
parameters. Whereas, one of the best MLP models in the literature achieved a 78.54% accuracy, while having three times more
parameters40 .

Discussion
In this paper we have introduced SET, a simple and efficient procedure to replace ANNs’ fully-connected bipartite layers with
sparse layers. We have validated our approach on 15 datasets (from different domains) and on three widely used ANN models,
i.e. RBMs, MLPs, and CNNs. We have evaluated SET in combination with two different training methods, i.e. contrastive


                                                                                                                                5/18
divergence and stochastic gradient descent, for unsupervised and supervised learning. We showed that SET is capable of
quadratically reducing the number of parameters of bipartite neural networks layers from the ANN design phase, at no decrease
in accuracy. In most of the cases, SET-RBMs, SET-MLPs, and SET-CNNs outperform their fully-connected counterparts.
Moreover, they always outperform their non-evolutionary counterparts, i.e. RBMFixProb , MLPFixProb , and CNNFixProb .
     We can conclude that the SET procedure is coherent with real-world complex networks, whereby nodes’ connections tend
to evolve into scale-free topologies46 . This feature has important implications in ANNs: we could envision a computational
time reduction by reducing the number of training epochs, if we would use for instance preferential attachment algorithms47 to
evolve faster the topology of the bipartite ANN layers towards a scale-free one. Of course, this possible improvement has to be
treated carefully, as forcing the model topology to evolve unnaturally faster into a scale-free topology may be prone to errors -
for instance, the data distribution may not be perfectly matched. Another possible improvement would be to analyze how to
remove the unimportant weights. In this article, we showed that it is efficient for SET to directly remove the connections with
weights closest to zero. Note that we have tried also to remove connections randomly, and, as expected, this led to dramatic
reductions in accuracy. Likewise, when we tried to remove the connections with the largest weights, the SET-MLP model was
not able to learn at all, performing similarly to a random classifier. However, we do not exclude the possibility that there may
be better, more sophisticated approaches to removing connections, e.g. using gradient methods25 , or centrality metrics from
network science48 .
     SET can be widely adopted to reduce the fully-connected layers into sparse topologies in other types of ANNs, e.g., recurrent
neural networks3 , deep reinforcement learning networks2, 49 , and so on. For a large scale utilization of SET, from the academic
environment to industry, one more step has to be achieved. Currently, all state-of-the-art deep learning implementations
are based on very well-optimized dense matrix multiplications on Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), while sparse matrix
multiplications are extremely limited in performance50, 51 . Thus, until optimized hardware for SET-like operations will appear
(e.g., sparse matrix multiplications), one would have to find some alternative solutions. E.g., low-level parallel computations of
neurons activations based just on their incoming connections and data batches to still perform dense matrix multiplications and
to have a low-memory footprint. If these software engineering challenges are solved, SET may prove to be the basis for much
larger ANNs, perhaps on a billion-node scale, to run in supercomputers. Also, it may lead to the building of small but powerful
ANNs which could be directly trained on low-resource devices (e.g. wireless sensor nodes, mobile phones), without the need of
first training them on supercomputers and then to move the trained models to low-resource devices, as is currently done by
state-of-the-art approaches13 . These powerful capabilities will be enabled by the linear relation between the number of neurons
and the amount of connections between them yielded by SET. ANNs built with SET will have much more representational
power, and better adaptive capabilities than the current state-of-the-art ANNs, and we hope that they will create a new research
direction in artificial intelligence.

Methods
Artificial neural networks      ANNs52 are mathematical models, inspired by biological neural networks, which can be used in
all three machine learning paradigms (i.e. supervised learning53 , unsupervised learning53 , and reinforcement learning54 ). These
make them very versatile and powerful, as quantifiable by the remarkable success registered recently by the last generation of
ANNs (also known as deep artificial neural networks or deep learning3 ) in many fields from computer vision3 to gaming2, 49 .
Just like their biological counterparts, ANNs are composed by neurons and weighted connections between these neurons. Based
on their purposes and architectures, there are many models of ANNs, such as restricted Boltzmann machines28 , multi layer
perceptrons55 , convolutional neural networks56 , recurrent neural networks57 , and so on. Many of these ANN models contain
fully-connected layers. A fully-connected layer of neurons means that all its neurons are connected to all the neurons belonging
to its adjacent layer in the ANN architecture. For the purpose of this paper, in this section we briefly describe three models
that contain fully-connected layers, i.e. restricted Boltzmann machines28 , multi layer perceptrons55 , and convolutional neural
networks3 .
     A restricted Boltzmann machine is a two-layer, generative, stochastic neural network that is capable to learn a probability
distribution over a set of inputs28 in an unsupervised manner. From a topological perspective, it allows only interlayer
connections. Its two layers are: the visible layer, in which the neurons represent the input data; and the hidden layer, in which
the neurons represent the features automatically extracted by the RBM model from the input data. Each visible neuron is
connected to all hidden neurons through a weighted undirected connection, leading to a fully-connected topology between the
two layers. Thus, the flow of information is bidirectional in RBMs, from the visible layer to the hidden layer, and from the
hidden layer to the visible layer, respectively. RBMs, beside being very successful in providing very good initialization weights
to the supervised training of deep artificial neural network architectures42 , are also very successful as stand alone models
in a variety of tasks, such as density estimation to model human choice31 , collaborative filtering58 , information retrieval59 ,
multi-class classification60 , and so on.
     Multi Layer Perceptron55 is a classical feed-forward ANN model that maps a set of input data to the corresponding set


                                                                                                                             6/18
of output data. Thus, it is used for supervised learning. It is composed by an input layer in which the neurons represent the
input data, an output layer in which the neurons represent the output data, and an arbitrary number of hidden layers in between,
with neurons representing the hidden features of the input data (to be automatically discovered). The flow of information in
MLPs is unidirectional, starting from the input layer towards the output layer. Thus, the connections are unidirectional and exist
just between consecutive layers. Any two consecutive layers in MLPs are fully-connected. There are no connections between
the neurons belonging to the same layer, or between the neurons belonging to layers which are not consecutive. In61 , it has
been demonstrated that MLPs are universal function approximators, so they can be used to model any type of regression or
classification problems.
    Convolutional Neural Networks3 are a class of feed-forward neural networks specialized for image recognition, representing
the state-of-the-art on these type of problems. They typically contain an input layer, an output layers, and a number of hidden
layers in between. From bottom to top, the first hidden layers are the convolutional layers, inspired by the biological visual
cortex, in which each neuron receives information just from the previous layer neurons belonging to its receptive field. Then,
the last hidden layers are fully connected ones.
    In general, working with ANN models involves two phases: 1) training (or learning), in which the weighted connections
between neurons are optimized using various algorithms (e.g. backpropagation procedure combined with stochastic gradient
descent62, 63 used in MLPs or CNNs, contrastive divergence29 used in RBMs) to minimize a loss function defined by their
purpose; and 2) inference, in which the optimized ANN model is used to fulfill its purpose.
Scale free complex networks       Complex networks (e.g. biological neural networks, actors and movies, power grids, trans-
portation networks) are everywhere, in different forms, and different fields (from neurobiology to statistical physics4 ). Formally,
a complex network is a graph with non-trivial topological features, human- or nature-made. One of the most well-known and
deeply studied type of topological features in complex networks is scale-freeness, due to the fact that a wide range of real-world
complex networks have this topology. A network with a scale-free topology7 is a sparse graph64 that approximately has a
power-law degree distribution P(d) ∼ d −γ , where the fraction P(d) from the total nodes of the network has d connections to
other nodes, and the parameter γ usually stays in the range γ ∈ (2, 3)
Box 1    Sparse Evolutionary Training (SET) pseudocode is detailed in Algorithm 1.

 1  %Initialization;
 2  initialize ANN model;
  3 set ε and ζ ;
  4 for each bipartite fully-connected (FC) layer of the ANN do
  5      replace FC with a Sparse Connected (SC) layer having a Erdős-Rényi topology given by ε and Eq.1;
  6 end
  7 initialize training algorithm parameters;
  8 %Training;
  9 for each training epoch e do
 10      perform standard training procedure;
 11      perform weights update;
 12      for each bipartite SC layer of the ANN do
 13           remove a fraction ζ of the smallest positive weights;
 14           remove a fraction ζ of the largest negative weights;
 15           if e is not the last training epoch then
 16                 add randomly new weights (connections) in the same amount as the ones removed previously;
 17           end
 18      end
 19 end
                                                  Algorithm 1: SET pseudocode


Data availability The data used in this paper are public datasets, freely available online, as reflected by their corresponding
citations from Table 1. Prototype software implementations of the models used in this study are freely available online at
https://github.com/dcmocanu/sparse-evolutionary-artificial-neural-networks

References
 1. Baldi, P., Sadowski, P. & Whiteson, D. Searching for exotic particles in high-energy physics with deep learning. Nat.
    Commun. 5, 4308 (2014).


                                                                                                                              7/18
 2. Mnih, V. et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518, 529–533 (2015).
 3. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444 (2015).
 4. Strogatz, S. H. Exploring complex networks. Nature 410, 268–276 (2001).
 5. Pessoa, L. Understanding brain networks and brain organization. Phys. Life Rev. 11, 400 – 435 (2014).
 6. Bullmore, E. & Sporns, O. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. Nat.
    Rev. Neurosci. 10, 186–198 (2009).
 7. Barabási, A.-L. & Albert, R. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286, 509–512 (1999).
 8. Watts, D. J. & Strogatz, S. H. Collective dynamics of ’small-world’ networks. Nature 393, 440–442 (1998).
 9. Mocanu, D. C. On the synergy of network science and artificial intelligence. In Proc. 25th International Joint Conference
    on Artificial Intelligence, 4020–4021 (2016).
10. Mocanu, D. C., Mocanu, E., Nguyen, P. H., Gibescu, M. & Liotta, A. A topological insight into restricted boltzmann
    machines. Mach. Learn. 104, 243–270 (2016).
11. Dieleman, S. & Schrauwen, B. Accelerating sparse restricted boltzmann machine training using non-gaussianity measures.
    In Proc. Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature Learning, 9 (2012).
12. Yosinski, J. & Lipson, H. Visually debugging restricted boltzmann machine training with a 3d example. In Representation
    Learning Workshop, 29th International Conference on Machine Learning (2012).
13. Han, S., Pool, J., Tran, J. & Dally, W. Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural network. In Proc.
    Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, 1135–1143 (2015).
14. Mocanu, D. C. et al. No-reference video quality measurement: added value of machine learning. J. Electron. Imaging 24,
    061208 (2015).
15. Whiteson, S. & Stone, P. Evolutionary function approximation for reinforcement learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 7, 877–917
    (2006).
16. McDonnell, J. R. & Waagen, D. Evolving neural network connectivity. In Proc. IEEE International Conference on Neural
    Networks, 863–868 vol.2 (1993).
17. Miikkulainen, R. et al. Evolving deep neural networks. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.00548 (2017).
18. Kowaliw, T., Bredeche, N., Chevallier, S. & Doursat, R. Artificial neurogenesis: An introduction and selective review. In
    Growing Adaptive Machines: Combining Development and Learning in Artificial Neural Networks, 1–60 (Springer Berlin
    Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014).
19. Stanley, K. O. & Miikkulainen, R. Evolving neural networks through augmenting topologies. Evol. Comput. 10, 99–127
    (2002).
20. Hausknecht, M., Lehman, J., Miikkulainen, R. & Stone, P. A neuroevolution approach to general atari game playing. IEEE
    T. Comp. Intel. AI 6, 355–366 (2014).
21. Miconi, T. Neural networks with differentiable structure. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06216 (2016).
22. Salimans, T., Ho, J., Chen, X., Sidor, S. & Openai, I. S. Evolution Strategies as a Scalable Alternative to Reinforcement
    Learning. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03864 (2017).
23. Such, F. P. et al. Deep Neuroevolution: Genetic Algorithms are a Competitive Alternative for Training Deep Neural
    Networks for Reinforcement Learning. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.06567 (2018).
24. Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. On random graphs i. Publ. Math-Debrecen 6, 290–297 (1959).
25. Weigend, A. S., Rumelhart, D. E. & Huberman, B. A. Generalization by weight-elimination with application to forecasting.
    In Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 3, 875–882 (Morgan-Kaufmann, 1991).
26. Diering, G. H. et al. Homer1a drives homeostatic scaling-down of excitatory synapses during sleep. Science 355, 511–515
    (2017).
27. de Vivo, L. et al. Ultrastructural evidence for synaptic scaling across the wake/sleep cycle. Science 355, 507–510 (2017).
28. Smolensky, P. Information processing in dynamical systems: Foundations of harmony theory. In Parallel Distributed
    Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, Vol. 1, 194–281 (MIT Press, Cambridge, 1986).
29. Hinton, G. E. Training Products of Experts by Minimizing Contrastive Divergence. Neural Comput. 14, 1771–1800 (2002).


                                                                                                                         8/18
30. Bengio, Y. Learning deep architectures for ai. Found. Trends Mach. Learn. 2, 1–127 (2009).
31. Osogami, T. & Otsuka, M. Restricted boltzmann machines modeling human choice. In Proc. Advances in Neural
    Information Processing Systems 27, 73–81 (2014).
32. Hinton, G. A practical guide to training restricted boltzmann machines. In Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade, vol. 7700
    of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 599–619 (Springer, 2012).
33. Salakhutdinov, R. & Murray, I. On the quantitative analysis of deep belief networks. In Proc. 25th International Conference
    on Machine Learning, 872–879 (2008).
34. Everitt, B. The Cambridge dictionary of statistics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK; New York, 2002).
35. Nuzzo, R. Scientific method: Statistical errors. Nature 506, 150–152 (2014).
36. Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R. & Newman, M. E. J. Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM Rev. 51, 661–703 (2009).
37. Newman, M. E., Strogatz, S. H. & Watts, D. J. Random graphs with arbitrary degree distributions and their applications.
    Phys. Rev. E 64, 026118 (2001).
38. Al-Rfou, R., Alain, G., Almahairi, A. & et al., C. A. Theano: A Python framework for fast computation of mathematical
    expressions. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.02688 (2016).
39. Urban, G. et al. Do deep convolutional nets really need to be deep and convolutional? Proc. 5th International Conference
    on Learning Representations (2016).
40. Lin, Z., Memisevic, R. & Konda, K. How far can we go without convolution: Improving fully-connected networks.
    Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.02580 (2015).
41. Hinton, G. E. & Salakhutdinov, R. R. Reducing the Dimensionality of Data with Neural Networks. Science 313, 504–507
    (2006).
42. Hinton, G. E., Osindero, S. & Teh, Y.-W. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural Comput. 18, 1527–1554
    (2006).
43. Jin, X. et al. Deep learning with s-shaped rectified linear activation units. In Proc. 30th AAAI Conference on Artificial
    Intelligence, 1737–1743 (2016).
44. Nair, V. & Hinton, G. E. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In Proc. 27th International
    Conference on Machine Learning, 807–814 (2010).
45. Danziger, S. A. et al. Functional census of mutation sequence spaces: the example of p53 cancer rescue mutants. IEEE
    ACM T. Comput. Bi. 3, 114–125 (2006).
46. Barabási, A.-L. Network science (Cambridge University Press, 2016).
47. Albert, R. & Barabási, A.-L. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47–97 (2002).
48. Mocanu, D. C., Exarchakos, G. & Liotta, A. Decentralized dynamic understanding of hidden relations in complex networks.
    Scientific Reports 8, 1571 (2018).
49. Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature 529, 484–489 (2016).
50. Lebedev, V. & Lempitsky, V. Fast convnets using group-wise brain damage. In Proc. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
    Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2554–2564 (2016).
51. Changpinyo, S., Sandler, M. & Zhmoginov, A. The power of sparsity in convolutional neural networks. Preprint at
    https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.06257 (2017).
52. Bishop, C. M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics) (Springer-Verlag New
    York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 2006).
53. Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. & Friedman, J. The Elements of Statistical Learning (Springer New York Inc., New York, NY,
    USA, 2001).
54. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1998).
55. Rosenblatt, F. Principles of Neurodynamics: Perceptrons and the Theory of Brain Mechanisms (Spartan, 1962).
56. LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y. & Haffner, P. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of
    the IEEE 86, 2278–2324 (1998).
57. Graves, A. et al. A novel connectionist system for unconstrained handwriting recognition. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
    Mach. Intell. 31, 855–868 (2009).


                                                                                                                          9/18
58. Salakhutdinov, R., Mnih, A. & Hinton, G. Restricted boltzmann machines for collaborative filtering. In Proc. 24th
    International Conference on Machine Learning, 791–798 (2007).
59. Gehler, P. V., Holub, A. D. & Welling, M. The rate adapting poisson model for information retrieval and object recognition.
    In Proc. 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning, 337–344 (2006).
60. Larochelle, H. & Bengio, Y. Classification using discriminative restricted boltzmann machines. In Proc. 25th International
    Conference on Machine Learning, 536–543 (2008).
61. Cybenko, G. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Math. Control Signal 2, 303–314 (1989).
62. Rumelhart, D., Hintont, G. & Williams, R. Learning representations by back-propagating errors. Nature 323, 533–536
    (1986).
63. Bottou, L. & Bousquet, O. The tradeoffs of large scale learning. In Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing
    Systems 20, 161–168 (2008).
64. Del Genio, C. I., Gross, T. & Bassler, K. E. All scale-free networks are sparse. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 178701 (2011).
65. Larochelle, H. & Murray, I. The neural autoregressive distribution estimator. In Proc. 14th International Conference on
    Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 29–37 (2011).
66. Marlin, B. M., Swersky, K., Chen, B. & de Freitas, N. Inductive principles for restricted boltzmann machine learning. In
    Proc. 13th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 509–516 (2010).
67. LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y. & Haffner, P. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. In Proceedings
    of the IEEE, vol. 86, 2278–2324 (1998).
68. Krizhevsky, A. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Master’s thesis (2009).
69. Xiao, H., Rasul, K. & Vollgraf, R. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms.
    Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.07747 (2017).

Author contributions statement
D.C.M. and E.M. conceived the initial idea. D.C.M., E.M., P.S., P.H.N., M.G., and A.L. designed the experiments and analyzed
the results. D.C.M. performed the experiments. D.C.M., E.M., P.S., P.H.N., M.G., and A.L. wrote the manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Materials and Correspondence
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.C. Mocanu (d.c.mocanu@tue.nl).




                                                                                                                        10/18
                                                                 a                                                 b                                                      d
                                                          hk
SCk                                                                                                                                                                                . . .
                                                         hk-1
                                                                                                                   c

Figure 1. An illustration of the SET procedure. For each Sparse Connected layer, SCk (a), of an ANN at the end of a training
epoch a fraction of the weights, the ones closest to zero, are removed (b). Then, new weighs are added randomly in the same
amount as the ones previously removed (c). Further on, a new training epoch is performed (d), and the procedure to remove
and add weights is repeated. The process continues for a finite number of training epochs, as usual in the ANNs training.


                                                                        RBM             RBMFixProb                  SET-RBM

                                nCD=1            nCD=1         nCD=1          nCD=3          nCD=3            nCD=3           nCD=10           nCD=10           nCD=10
                               nh=100           nh=250        nh=500         nh=100         nh=250           nh=500           nh=100           nh=250           nh=500
                     −80                                                                                                                                                      1.00

      DNA                                                                                                                                                                             Weights
                    −100                                                                                                                                                      0.75

log-prob. [nats]
                    −120                                                                                                                                                      0.50
                    −140                                                                                                                                                      0.25   distribution
                           a                b             c              d              e                f                g                h                i
                    −160                                                                                                                                                      0.00
                           1   25    50
                                00      1 0
                                        0       25
                                                 00
                                                      1 0
                                                      50 0    251 0
                                                                50 0
                                                                   00
                                                                              1 0
                                                                             25
                                                                              50 0
                                                                                 00
                                                                                            25  1 0
                                                                                                50 0
                                                                                                   00
                                                                                                             25  1 0
                                                                                                                 50 0
                                                                                                                    00
                                                                                                                              25  1 0
                                                                                                                                  50 0
                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                00
                                                                                                                                                     1 0
                                                                                                                                                     50 0       25
                                                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                                                          00
                           Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]    Epochs [#]     Epochs [#]     Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]


Figure 2. Experiments with RBM variants on the DNA dataset. For each model studied we have considered three cases for
the number of Contrastive Divergence steps, nCD = 1 (a, b, c), nCD = 3 (d, e, f), and nCD = 10 (g, h, i). Also, we considered
three cases for the number of hidden neurons, nh = 100 (a, d, g), nh = 250 (b, e, h), and nh = 500 (c, f, i). In each panel, the
x-axes show the training epochs; the left y-axes show the average log-probabilities computed on the test data with AIS33 ; and
the right y-axes (the stacked bar on the right side of the panels) reflect the fraction given by the nW of each model over the sum
of the nW of all three models. Overall, SET-RBM outperforms the other two models in most of the cases. Also, it is interesting
to see that SET-RBM and RBMFixProb are much more stable and do not present the over-fitting problems of RBM.


                                nCD=1            nCD=1          nCD=1          nCD=3             nCD=3            nCD=3           nCD=10           nCD=10            nCD=10
                               nh=100           nh=250         nh=500         nh=100            nh=250           nh=500           nh=100           nh=250            nh=500
                     −80                                                                                                                                                           1.0

       DNA
                    −100

                                                                                                                                                                                         P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
 log-prob. [nats]
                    −120
                    −140
                           a                b              c              d                 e                f                g                h                 i
                    −160                                                                                                                                                           0.0
                           1    25    50
                                 00     1 0
                                        0        25
                                                  1 0
                                                  50 0
                                                     00
                                                               25
                                                                 00
                                                                       1 0
                                                                       50 0   25
                                                                                00
                                                                                      1 0
                                                                                      50 0      251 0
                                                                                                  50 0
                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                   00
                                                                                                                       1 0
                                                                                                                       50 0       25
                                                                                                                                    00
                                                                                                                                       1 0
                                                                                                                                       50 0        251 0
                                                                                                                                                     50 0
                                                                                                                                                        00
                                                                                                                                                                     25
                                                                                                                                                                       00
                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                                              00
                           Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]     Epochs [#]     Epochs [#]        Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]       Epochs [#]        Epochs [#]

Figure 3. SET-RBM evolution towards a scale-free topology on the DNA dataset. We have considered three cases for the
number of Contrastive Divergence steps, nCD = 1 (a, b, c), nCD = 3 (d, e, f), and nCD = 10 (g, h, i). Also, we considered three
cases for the number of hidden neurons, nh = 100 (a, d, g), nh = 250 (b, e, h), and nh = 500 (c, f, i). In each panel, the x-axes
show the training epochs; the left y-axes (red color) show the average log-probabilities computed for SET-RBMs on the test
data with AIS33 ; and the right y-axes (cyan color) show the p-values computed between the degree distribution of the hidden
neurons in SET-RBM and a power-law distribution. We may observe that for models with a high enough number of hidden
neurons, the SET-RBM topology always tends to become scale-free.


                                                                                                                                                                                     11/18
                                                                           a
                                                       Examples of images from the MNIST dataset



                                              Connectivity patterns of the visible neurons of a SET-RBM
                                          Random Initialization   After 150 epochs        After 5000 epochs
                                      1
                                                                                                                   80
                                      8
                      n h=500                                                                                      70




                                                                                                                       Connections to hidden neurons [#]
                                     15
                    Height [pixel]                                                                                 60
                                     22
                                                                                                                   50
                                     28
                                      1                                                                            40

                                      8                                                                            30
                      n h=2500
                                     15
                    Height [pixel]
                                                                                                                   20

                                     22                                                                            10

                                     28                                                                            0
                                          1   8    15 22       28 1   8    15 22      28 1   8    15 22       28
                                              Width [pixel]           Width [pixel]          Width [pixel]

                                                                         b
                                                  Examples of images from the Caltech 16x16 dataset




                                              Connectivity patterns of the visible neurons of a SET-RBM
                                          Random Initialization   After 150 epochs        After 5000 epochs
                                      1
                                                                                                                   120

                      n h=500
                                      6




                                                                                                                               Connections to hidden neurons [#]
                                                                                                                   100
                    Height [pixel]   11
                                                                                                                   80
                                     16
                                      1                                                                            60


                      n h=2500
                                      6                                                                            40

                    Height [pixel]   11                                                                            20

                                     16                                                                            0
                                          1     6       11     16 1    6       11     16 1    6       11     16
                                               Width [pixel]          Width [pixel]          Width [pixel]


Figure 4. SET-RBMs connectivity patterns for the visible neurons. a On the MNIST dataset. b On the Caltech 101 16x16
dataset. For each dataset, we have analyzed two SET-RBM architectures, i.e. 500 and 2500 hidden neurons. The heat-map
matrices are obtained by reshaping the visible neurons vector to match the size of the original input images. In all cases, it can
be observed that the connectivity starts from an initial Erdős-Rényi distribution. Then, during the training process, it evolves
towards organized patterns which depend on the input images.




                                                                                                                                                                   12/18
                                               a                                                                                               b
                             100                                  1.0




                                                                                                Number of weights [ x105]
                                                                                                                            25
                              80                                  0.8

                MNIST
                                                                                                                            20

                                                                            P-value [#]
                              60                                  0.6
                                                                                                                            15
             Accuracy [%]     40                                  0.4
                                                                                                                            10
                                                    MLP
                              20                    MLPFixProb    0.2                                                           5
                                                    SET-MLP
                                  0                      0.0                                                                    0
                                      0   250 500 750 1000                                                                           MLP    MLPFixProb SET-MLP
                                             Epochs [#]
                                               c                                                                                              d
                             80                                  1.0



                                                                             P-value [#]
                                                                                                           200
                                                                 0.8
                             60
                CIFAR10
                                                                                                           150
                                                                 0.6
                             40
              Accuracy [%]
                                                                                                           100


                                                                       Number of weights [ x105]
                                                                 0.4
                                                   MLP
                             20                    MLPFixProb    0.2                                               50
                                                   SET-MLP
                              0                                  0.0                                                        0
                                  0       250 500 750 1000                                                                          MLP    MLPFixProb SET-MLP
                                             Epochs [#]
                                               e                                                                                              f
                             80                                  1.0




                                                                                       Number of weights [ x105]
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                 0.8
                             60
                HIGGS
                                                                                                                   15


                                                                   P-value [#]
                                                                 0.6
                             40
             Accuracy [%]
                                                                                                                   10
                                                                 0.4
                                                   MLP
                             20                    MLPFixProb    0.2                                                        5
                                                   SET-MLP
                              0                                  0.0                                                        0
                                  0       250 500 750 1000                                                                          MLP    MLPFixProb SET-MLP
                                             Epochs [#]

Figure 5. Experiments with MLP variants using 3 benchmark datasets. a, c, e reflect models performance in terms of
classification accuracy (left y-axes) over training epochs (x-axes); the right y-axes of a, c, e give the p-values computed between
the degree distribution of the hidden neurons of the SET-MLP models and a power-law distribution, showing how the
SET-MLP topology becomes scale-free over training epochs. b, d, f depict the number of weights of the three models on each
dataset. The most striking situation happens for the CIFAR10 dataset (c, d) where the SET-MLP model outperforms drastically
the MLP model, while having approximately 100 times fewer parameters.




                                                                                                                                                                 13/18
                                        L1 regularization          L2 regularization         no regularization

                                    SET-MLP                        MLPFixProb                          MLP
                   92       a                               b                            c

    ReLU           91
With Nesterov      90
Accuracy [%]
                   89
                   88
                   92       d                               e                            f

     ReLU          91
Without Nesterov   90
  Accuracy [%]     89
                   88
                   92       g                               h                            i

   SReLU           91
With Nesterov      90
Accuracy [%]
                   89
                   88
                   92       j                               k                            l

     SReLU         91
Without Nesterov   90
 Accuracy [%]      89
                   88
                        0       100 200 300 400 500 0           100 200 300 400 500 0         100 200 300 400 500
                                    Epochs [#]                      Epochs [#]                    Epochs [#]

Figure 6. Models accuracy using three weights regularization techniques on the Fashion-MNIST dataset. All models have
been trained with stochastic gradient descent, having the same hyper-parameters, number of hidden layers (i.e. 3), and number
of hidden neurons per layer (i.e. 1000). a, b, c use ReLU activation function for the hidden neurons and Nesterov momentum;
d, e, f use ReLU activation function without Nesterov momentum; g, h, i use SReLU activation function and Nesterov
momentum; and j, k, l use SReLU activation function without Nesterov momentum. a, d, g, j present experiments with
SET-MLP; b, e, h, k with MLPFixProb ; and c, f, i, l with MLP.




                                                                                                                       14/18
                                    a                                                                       b
               100




                                                                  Number of weights [ x105]
                                                                                              80
                80

  CIFAR10
                                                                                              60
                60

Accuracy [%]    40                                                                            40
                                            CNN
                20                          CNNFixProb                                        20
                                            SET-CNN
                 0                                                                             0
                     0   250 500 750 1000                                                          CNN   CNNFixProb SET-CNN
                            Epochs [#]
Figure 7. Experiments with CNN variants on the CIFAR10 dataset. a Models performance in terms of classification accuracy
(left y-axes) over training epochs (x-axes). b The number of weights of the three models on each dataset. The convolutional
layers of each model have in total 287008 weights, while the fully connected (or the sparse) layers on top have 8413194,
184842, and 184842 weights for CNN, CNNFixProb , and SET-CNN, respectively.




                                                                                                                        15/18
                                                                                                                                RBM          RBMFixProb           SET-RBM
                                                                                         n CD =1        n CD =1      n CD =1      n CD =3      n CD =3      n CD =3     n CD =10     n CD =10     n CD =10
                                                                                        n h =100       n h =250     n h =500     n h =100     n h =250     n h =500     n h =100     n h =250     n h =500
                                                                                 −10                                                                                                                          1.0




                                  DNA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Weights
                                                                                 −15




             M20hr−−m0
                                                                                 −20                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                 −25                                                                                                                                distribution




                                                C−nnect4          ADULT
                                                                                 −30                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Weights
                                                                                 420




           l−g-prob. [nats] l−g-prob. [nats] l−g-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats]
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                 −40                                                                                                                              distribution
                                                                                 −60                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                 480                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Weights
                                                                                4100
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  distribution
                                                                                4120
                                                                                −140
                                                                                −160                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                 410                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                 420
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5  Weights
                                                                                 430                                                                                                                              distribution
                                                                                 −40                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                  . [nats]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Weights
                        NIPS-0-12
                                                                                −400
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  distribution
                                                 log-prob
                                                                                −600
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                 420                                                                                                                          1.0




                  Web
                                                                                 −40
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5  Weights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  distribution


                                  RCV1          OCR-letters
                                                                                 −60
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0




            l−g-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats]
                                                                                 −40                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Weights
                                                                                 −50
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  distribution
                                                                                 −60
                                                                                 −70
                                                                                 −80                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                 420                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                 −40
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5  Weights
                                                                                 −60                                                                                                                              distribution
                                                                                        n h =5   00   nh =2500     nh =5000      nh =500      nh =2500    nh =5000      nh =500     nh =2500     nh =5000 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0




                              -prob. [nats] l−g-prob. [nats] l−g-prob. [nats]
           CalTech 28328 CalTech 16x16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Weights
                                                                                −100
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                −200                                                                                                                              distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                4100                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                4200
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5  Weights
                                                                                4300                                                                                                                              distribution
                                                                                −400                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Weights
                                                                                −100


                        MNIST
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                −150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  distribution
                                                 l−g                            −200                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                   1    251 0
                                                                                          50 0         251 0
                                                                                                         50 0       251 0
                                                                                                                      50 0       25   1 0
                                                                                                                                      50 0    251 0
                                                                                                                                                50 0       251 0
                                                                                                                                                             50 0       251 0
                                                                                                                                                                          50 0       251 0
                                                                                                                                                                                       50 0       25    50
                                                                                             00             00           00              00        00           00           00           00        00       00
                                                                                       Epochs [#]     Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]


Figure 8. Experiments with RBM variants using 11 benchmark datasets. For each model studied we have considered three
cases for the number of Contrastive Divergence steps nCD = {1, 3, 10}, and three cases for the number of hidden neurons (nh ).
For the first 8 datasets (from top to bottom) we have used nh = {100, 250, 500}, and for the last three datasets we have used
nh = {500, 2500, 5000}. The x-axes show the training epochs; the left y-axes show the average log-probabilities computed on
the test data with Annealed Importance Sampling(AIS); and the right y-axes (the stacked bar on the right part of the plots)
reflect the fraction given by the nW of each model over the sum of the nW of all three models. Overall, SET-RBM outperforms
the other two models in most of the cases. Also, it is interesting to see that SET-RBM and RBMFixProb are much more stable
and do not present the over-fitting problems of RBM.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16/18
                                                                                                                                                             n CD =1      n CD =1      n CD =1      n CD =3      n CD =3       n CD =3     n CD =10     n CD =10     n CD =10
                                                                                                                                                            n h =100     n h =250     n h =500     n h =100     n h =250      n h =500     n h =100     n h =250     n h =500
                                                                                                                                                     110                                                                                                                         1.0




                                                                                                      DNA




                 W#b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                                     −15




                                                                     -0-12
                                                                                                                                                     −20                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                     −25




                                                                                 Mushrooms
                                                                                                                                                     −30                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                                     −20




                                 RCV1          OCR-letters                                                          Conn#c−4          ADULT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                     −40
                                                                                                                                    −60                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                    180                                                                                                                                          1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                   1100
                                                                                                                                   1120                                                                                                                                          0.5




           log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats]
                                                                                                                                   1140
                                                                                                                                   −160                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                     −10                                                                                                                         1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                                     −20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                     −30
                                                                                                                                                     −40                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                   −400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                     NIPS                                                                                          −600

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                     −20                                                                                                                         1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                                     −40                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                     −60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                     −40                                                                                                                         1.0
                                                                                                                                                     −50                                                                                                                             #]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P-value [
                                                                                                                                                     −60                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                     −70
                                                                                                                                                     −80                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                     −20                                                                                                                         1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                                     −40                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                     −60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                            n h =500    n h =2500    n h =5000     n h =500    n h =2500      n h =5000    n h =500    n h =2500    n h =5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0




                             CalTech 28x28 CalTech 16x16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P-value [#]




                MNIST
                                                                                                                                   −100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                   −200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                   −                 100                                                                                                                         1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P-value [#]




           log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats] log-prob. [nats]
                                                                                                                                   −200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                   −300


                                                                                                                                   −400                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P-value [#]
                                                                                                                                   1100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                   1150
                                                                                                                                   1200                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                       1     25
                                                                                                                                                              1 00
                                                                                                                                                              50          25
                                                                                                                                                                           1 00
                                                                                                                                                                           50          25
                                                                                                                                                                                        1 00
                                                                                                                                                                                        50          25
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 00
                                                                                                                                                                                                     50          25    1 00    251 00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50         25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50           1 00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50          25    50
                                                                                                                                                                 00           00           00           00        00   50           00          00           00        00       00
                                                                                                                                                           Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]    Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]   Epochs [#]


Figure 9. SET-RBM evolution towards a scale-free topology. We have considered three cases for the number of Contrastive
Divergence steps nCD = {1, 3, 10}, and three cases for the number of hidden neurons (nh ). For the first 8 datasets (from top to
bottom) we have used nh = {100, 250, 500}, and for the last three datasets we have used nh = {500, 2500, 5000}. The x-axes
show the training epochs; the left y-axes (red color) show the average log-probabilities computed for SET-RBMs on the test
data with AIS; and the right y-axes (cyan color) show the p-values computed between the degree distribution of the hidden
neurons in SET-RBM and a power-law distribution. We may observe that for models with a high enough number of hidden
neurons, the SET-RBM topology always tends to become scale-free.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17/18
                    Experiments           Dataset                                         Dataset Properties
                       type                                      Domain       Data type Features [#] Train samples [#] Test samples[#]
                                                 ADULT         households       binary        123             5000          26147
                                                 Connect4          games        binary        126            16000          47557
                                                   DNA           genetics       binary        180             1400           1186
                                      UCI       Mushrooms        biology        binary        112             2000           5624
                       RBMs        evaluation NIPS-0-12        documents        binary        500             400            1240
                      variants        suite     OCR-letters        letters      binary        128            32152          10000
                                       65
                                                  RCV1         documents        binary        150            40000         150000
                                                    Web          Internet       binary        300            14000          32561
                                  CalTech 101     16x16           images        binary        256             4082           2302
                                             66
                                  Silhouettes     28x28           images        binary        784             4100           2307
                                                 67
                                           MNIST                   digits       binary        784            60000          10000
                                           MNIST67                 digits      grayscale      784            60000          10000
                       MLPs               CIFAR1068               images      RGB colors     3072            50000          10000
                      variants             HIGGS1            particle physics real values     28           10500000        500000
                                      Fashion-MNIST69       fashion products grayscale        784            60000          10000
                    CNNs variants         CIFAR1068               images      RGB colors     3072            50000          10000


Table 1. Datasets characteristics. The data used in this paper have been chosen to cover a wide range of fields where ANNs
have the potential to advance state-of-the-art, including biology, physics, computer vision, data mining, and economics.


                  Dataset                    RBM                    RBMFixProb             SET-RBM                XBM
                                  log-prob. nh    nW    nCD log-prob. nh    nW nCD log-prob. nh  nW nCD log-prob. nh   nW   nCD
                        ADULT       -14.91 100 12300 10 -14.79 500 4984 10 -13.85 500 4797 3              -15.89 1200 12911 1
                        Connect4     -5.01  500 63000 10 -15.01 500 5008 10 -13.12 500 4820 10 -17.37 1200 12481 1
                          DNA       -85.97 500 90000 10 -86.90 500 5440 10 -82.51 250 3311 3              -83.17 1600 17801 1
               UCI     Mushrooms -11.35 100 11200 10 -11.36 500 4896 10 -10.63 250 2787 10 -14.71 1000 10830 1
            evaluation NIPS-0-12 -274.60 250 125000 3 -282.67 500 8000 10 -276.62 500 7700 3 -287.43 100 5144                1
              suite    OCR-letters -29.33 500 64000 10 -38.58 500 5024 10 -28.69 500 4835 10 -33.08 1200 13053 1
                         RCV1       -47.24 500 75000 3        -50.34 500 5200 10 -47.60 500 5005 10 -49.68 1400 14797 1
                          Web       -31.74 500 150000 1       -31.32 500 6400 10 -28.74 500 6160 10 -30.62 2600 29893 1
           CalTech 101   16x16      -28.41 2500 640000 10 -53.25 5000 42048 10 -46.08 5000 40741 10 -69.29        500 6721   1
           Silhouettes   28x28     -159.51 5000 3920000 3 -126.69 5000 46272 10 -104.89 2500 25286 10 -142.96 1500 19201 1
                    MNIST           -91.70 2500 1960000 10 -117.55 5000 46272 10 -86.41 5000 44536 10 -85.21 27000 387955 1:25


Table 2. Summarization of the experiments with RBM variants. On each dataset, we report the best average log-probabilities
obtained with AIS on the test data for each model. nh represents the number of hidden neurons, nCD the number of CD steps,
and nW the number of weights in the model.


              Dataset   Data           Architecture     Activation         MLP               MLPFixProb       SET-MLP
                     augmentation                                  Accuracy [%]    nW    Accuracy [%] nW Accuracy [%] nW
              MNIST      no       784-1000-1000-1000-10 SReLU         98.55      2794000    97.68     89797 98.74     89797
             CIFAR10     yes      3072-4000-1000-4000-10 SReLU        68.70     20328000    62.19    278630 74.84    278630
              HIGGS      no        28-1000-1000-1000-2   SReLU        78.44      2038000    76.69     80614 78.47     80614


Table 3. Summarization of the experiments with MLP variants. On each dataset, we report the best classification accuracy
obtained by each model on the test data. nW represents the number of weights in the model. The only difference between the
three models is the network topology, i.e. MLP has fully connected layers, MLPFixProb has sparse layers with Erdős-Rényi fixed
topology, and SET-MLP has sparse evolutionary layers trained with SET.




                                                                                                                                         18/18
